Welcome to the DietDoctor podcast.
I'm your host Dr. Bret Scher.
Today it's my pleasure to be joined
by Ivor Cummins, fatemperor.com,
and Denver's Diet Doctor
Dr. Jeffry Gerber.
They are the authors of this fantastic book,
"Eat Rich, Live Long, the power of low-carb
and keto for weight loss and great health."
And the two of them are a fantastic team,
I really enjoyed talking to them.
We talk about coronary calcium scores,
we talk about the benefits of a low-carb diet,
how it works, why it works
and how it's sort of one piece of the puzzle
for solving health problems.
It's a nice overview
with some very good practical takeaways
that you can walk away with
and see how can I improve my life now.
So I hope you enjoy this episode.
If you want to learn more
you can look at us at DietDoctor.com
and you can learn more about me
at lowcarbcardiologist.com.
Now stay tuned,
I hope you'll enjoy this interview
with Dr. Jeffry Gerber and Ivor Cummins.
Dr. Jeffry Gerber and Ivor Cummins,
thank you so much for joining me
on the DietDoctor podcast today.
Great to be here, Bret.
Thanks, Bret.
The first thing I want to talk to you about
is I learned from you guys
you have to be very careful
who you choose to write a book with.
Because then you're sort of stuck
with that person, right?
You guys are doing so much together,
probably so many joint interviews,
you are scheduled to talk together
at the conference today
and now we even have you
sharing one microphone.
So maybe I want to ask you
if you're happy with your choice,
but I don't know if we want
to talk about that right away,
so instead talk to me a little bit
about of  what led up to your book
"Eat Rich, Live Long, the power of low-carb
and keto for weight loss and great health".
Give me a little bit of the background.
What inspired you to write this book
and what led to it?
Well, Jeff your history with low-carb
goes back a lot longer,
so maybe give your history first?
Yes, Brett, it actually ties
into your original question.
So I've been interested in nutrition
for over 20 years.
As you know, I am a family physician
having done this for now 30 years almost
and about 20 years ago I started
to teach myself about nutrition
after patients had approached me,
family members approached me,
I had some experience with losing
40 pounds on my own
and just realized we didn't learn much
about nutrition in medical school.
You know we maybe had two hours or less
and so like all of us we taught ourselves.
And so it was about four or five years ago
that I had met Ivor.
I had a particular interest not only
in nutrition but cardiovascular disease.
And I always joke if it wasn't for cholesterol
we'd probably all be on a low-carb diet.
So at any rate,
four years and a half years ago
this chemical engineer out of nowhere puts
up this video, "The cholesterol conundrum"
and I immediately contacted this guy
and I realized how connected we were
that the engineer from one walk of life
and the doctor from the other walk of life,
our paths crossed at this opportune time
and realizing that we were both focused
on diet and cardiovascular risk
and I had said back then to Ivor,
we had done a little private video Skype
and I said to the guy,
"I think we need to collaborate".
And you know he said,
"What's the happening?"
and then he said to his wife,
"Who is this crazy doctor from Colorado
that wants to collaborate?"
And so essentially
this is what it's turned into.
That's fantastic.
And the genesis
of the cholesterol conundrum
was around 2012 I got
some very poor blood tests.
I won't go into details, but multiple doctors
I consulted couldn't really explain
the two key things about any challenge.
You know, what's the implication
for mortality/morbidity
and what are the root causes
that would drive those blood metrics.
And basically not getting any answers
I began to research intensively on...
within weeks I was
on carbohydrate metabolism as the cause.
Yeah, we see it time and time again,
someone has this personal experience
that sends them on this is path of discovery
and they end up with a low-carb diet
as being such a powerful treatment
for what they're looking for
and yet we were taught nothing of that.
We were taught nothing of that
in medical school and residency,
so I'm amazed that you
had been practicing this way
for more than a decade.
And at that time these conferences
like Low-Carb USA or Low-Carb Breckinridge
didn't exist.
So how do you feel now when you come
to a conference like this
and they ask you or ask the crowd,
"How many people are physicians?"
and so many hands go up?
I mean you must feel
a little bit of pride in that.
Yeah, when I first got involved with it
in the year 2000 I was on my own.
And interestingly it wasn't
until I think 2005.
Still on my own I had done my own research,
reading medical journals,
fascinated with the metabolic syndrome,
understanding how that was a root cause,
but in 2005 the first person I reached out to
on social media was Jackie Eberstein,
who was the nurse of Dr. Atkins.
And my hands were shaking,
I somehow found her website,
found her email
and I thought that this person
would never reply.
And she replied right back
and she was lovely, she was warm,
she answered all my questions,
so that was kind of the beginning.
And, you know, the Internet social media
was nothing back then,
but slowly but surely it grew.
I connected with Jimmy Moore
and we really have to give him credit,
because if it wasn't for him,
I really don't think this community would be
as connected as we are.
So to his credit as well I became a member
of an obesity Society.
And it was funny back then,
there were a lot of physicians
and myself and Dr. Eric Westman
would walk around the room
and real quietly say to the other doctor,
"I'm low-carb. Are you low-carb, doctor?"
And you had to really like...
Keep it on the down low.
Keep it on the down low
and slowly but surely it's grown,
Dr. Westman became the president
of the society
and that's really helped to make, I think,
physicians aware
and, you know, we've just watched
this blossom ever since.
And Ivor and I both attended the summit
in Cape Town South Africa from Tim Noakes.
This was back in 2015.
And we thought it would be a great idea
to bring conferences to the United States.
So with my co-organizer Rod Taylor
we have conferences in Colorado,
we have one coming up next year in 2019
in March in Denver,
and like you said it is just rewarding
to see healthcare professionals
attending these things,
because honestly they are the guys,
they're the gatekeepers
that need to learn this first.
But we also love having the general public
and these events that we're at today
really helped to bring everybody together
and advance nutritional science.
Yeah, that's so true and it seems
like the doctors are catching on,
but Ivor engineers are leading the way
and that's the fascinating part.
And what I really like about most engineers,
I can't group you all into one,
but in general the problem-solving skills
in the way of thinking things
as problem solvers
is unique to the world of medicine
unfortunately,
but that's sort of what we need
and you talk a lot about the Pareto principle
and you talk about
sort of problem-solving metrics.
So give us a little overview of how you think
your approach to problems differ
than the average physicians approach
to health problems.
Right, Bret.
Well, essentially we use a lot of tools,
systematic tools.
So there is the Pareto principle,
which is a rack and stack of the most
important factors based on the evidence
and that's really important.
Those comparative analysis,
a tool called Kepner Tragoe,
where you prosecute all of the distinctions
between what the problem is and is not
and then you record the inferences.
So it's kind of like
a little epidemiological.
It's looking at all the differences
and what might cause them
and that can become a very long list.
And then there's hypothesis for
against charts,
where you look at many hypothesis
for a single problem.
And we split up many, many hypothesis
and they are constantly judged
against each other
based on the evidence
for each individual one and against.
And there's never any clarity early
in a complex problem,
especially a multifactor.
So you have many, many hypotheses
and they are pitched against each other.
And that's
an enormously important discipline,
which doesn't really happen in medicine.
Usually a hypothesis gains ground,
becomes established,
the orthodoxy get behind it
and it kind of transcends into dogma.
So there's a huge difference.
And then statistical inference and
design of experiments to test hypotheses
is an automatic part of our life.
An autopsy, so intense autopsy
with electron microscopes and other tools
to dig in and scrutinize the problem
at a physical level.
And again you don't have
so much of that medicine.
When I hear you go
through this checklist
and then I think in my mind
how we write guidelines in medicine
and they're so polar opposite.
I mean the guidelines are...
you get a group of people together
that do a sort of a cursory evaluation
of the evidence,
they come up
with their best case scenario
and their opinions
of what the guidelines should be.
That is a far cry
from what you just described.
And one crucial thing I'll just add,
there are many more tools,
but also the experience
of decades of using these tools...
you less and less make mistakes or jump
to conclusions through sheer experience.
But a crucial one is to always look
for black swans,
for contradictory evidence
against your hypothesis.
So that's an enormous part of the time
to resolution and success in engineering
is you look for negative data
that conflicts with your hypothesis
and you rapidly kill incorrect hypotheses
or you rewrite them
to accommodate the conflicting data.
And that's just so central
but I must say in nutritional medicine
that's the most extraordinary difference.
Confirmatory data is always looked for
to build up more and more evidence
to support a hypothesis,
whereas one or two conflicting pieces
of data could reset the whole team
and get you back on the correct path
doesn't happen.
So we do have criteria in medicine
that prove or disprove hypotheses.
And that's the Bradford Hill criteria,
but we've set the bar so low
that we don't look at it
like a scientist or an engineer looks at it.
Right and I wonder how many doctors
are even aware of the Bradford Hill criteria.
And when you're interpreting
an observational study
that shows a relative risk of 1.18
and that makes it as causative,
which, you know, that doesn't even scratch
the Bradford Hill criteria,
I think it's just an underused tool for sure.
And actually another example
of Bradford Hill that just springs to mind,
there has to be directionality
of dose-response.
So cause X supposedly driving Y,
as X increases, why should increase?
But we have many examples including
cholesterol and other things,
whether is not a dose-response.
Yes so Bradford Hill is excellent actually
in principle,
but it's utilization is almost zero
from what I've seen.
Let's get into some of the specifics.
So you talked
about the dose-response, Ivor.
And you spoke about that
in your talk yesterday,
specifically about coronary calcium score.
So I know you're a big proponent
of the coronary calcium score.
And one of the things you said was
there are 17 studies I think you quoted
where LDL does not correlate
with the degree of coronary calcium score.
Yeah, actually there's a 2009 paper
and a book publication I think in 15,
can't recall the author,
but I think it's closer to 20
and even includes familial
hypercholesterolemia studies.
And across the board
with one exception in 19 studies,
there's a very slight correlation between
prospective LDL and coronary calcium.
Now coronary calcium is far and away
the best metric of atherosclerosis extent
and future risk.
It beats all the risk factors together.
And it's because it sees
the actual disease process,
the calcification
that's the response to injury
for this inflammatory vascular disease.
But it is interesting there's almost
no correlation with cholesterol metrics.
Interest needed do highlight
that insulin pops up several times,
but not cholesterol.
So I think to engineers
working on cholesterol,
that and myriads other kind of negative
pieces of evidence
would've caused us to totally retool
the cholesterol hypothesis
very early in the prosecution
of the problem-solving effort.
And we have 50 years now
where the negative evidence
is essentially almost suppressed,
but certainly ignored.
So it's interesting...
mainstream, half of the cardiologists think
that the calcium score has a benefit,
half of them don't,
but it's interesting when you look
at guidelines,
they try to tack on calcium score
with your AHA risk markers,
and what we're suggesting is that that's not
the right way to use the tools
that use... just simply look at calcium
score by itself, independent of cholesterol
and what I can add is just clinically
we see that LDL cholesterol LDL-P
is all over the board
and it doesn't correlate
with the calcium score.
And this is especially...
so we see lots of patients
who have been doing low-carb paleo diets
and I had many over years
where there are these cholesterol
hyperresponders
where they tend to high LDL-C,
high LDL P
and many of them
have calcium scores of zero,
a perfect score of zero,
which gives you a 15 year warranty.
Let's talk about that 15 year warranty
for a second, because I have to be honest,
I have a little bit of trouble
with that term,
because it almost implies the risk is zero.
So I think we have to admit
if you have a calcium score of zero,
your risk of a cardiac event
in the next 10 years is not zero.
It's very low, it's between 1% and 2%,
but it's not zero.
So I think that's important
to sort of clarifying the warranty.
It's really important to clarify
and anyone that infers from the word
warranty it's zero is mistaking obviously.
And the warranty I think
there were two papers
were warranty was used
in the title of the publication
and it probably is unfortunate.
So one of the largest study showed
just from memory
that zero scoring middle-age people I think
12 years later at 99.6% were still alive.
And high-scoring people 75.6
were still alive.
Now that's an enormous difference
in mortality.
So although enormous, there's no zero,
and I think Jeff you probably agree
that if you're zero calcium,
there are exceptions.
On one end there are people with zero who
have rapid progression of atherosclerosis
and a soft plaque does rupture
before there's significant calcification
to show up in the scan.
I mean later you could look
and probably find diffuse calcification,
but not enough to register.
Interestingly on the other end of the scale
there's a small maybe 1% of people
who have huge calcification
and who don't seem to have events
and they appear to be the people
where the protective effect of calcification,
which is to protect the arteries
when they're inflamed,
is so advanced and rapidly progressing
that they actually end up with massive
calcification but relatively stable arteries,
they almost have a full metal jacket.
So I think those two corner cases
around 1% at each end
illustrate the protective nature of calcium,
it's a fantastic evolutionary process,
it's actually bone matrix,
it's identical to bone matrix formation,
but of course people rapidly progressing
may have their event
before the calcification establishes.
So around 1% events
in the following 10 years
for zero versus in your recent paper, Jeff,
around 37% for high scores close to 1,000.
People just need to see
it's not 100% perfect.
And that's a great point to bring up though
because I think we can fall into a trap
of being sort of overly reassured
with a score of zero.
It's not, "Your score is zero, see you later,
you don't have to worry about anything."
It's, "Your score is zero,
but now you're on our radar screen
to follow again to make sure
there's no progression."
So one other point is criticism of the test
is that it doesn't visualize soft plaque.
And when you look at the data first of all,
so when your score goes from zero to 1,000,
this is independent of whether you see
soft plaque or not.
If you have a zero score you still have
a small chance of having an event.
Now the question is
if you can visualize soft plaque,
would that change
your ability to predict risk
for these people that have
a low calcium score?
So you can do a CTMR,
you could do a CT angiogram
and then you get to see the soft plaque.
But in our experience it doesn't change
the data
looking at a CT calcium by itself.
So Jeff, what do you think about
the carotid intima media thickness
as a surrogate for that?
Obviously again we're not talking
about the specific site
we're concerned about
and we're not even talking
about plaque so much.
It's just the thickness of the intima
of the carotid artery,
but something you can measure quickly
without radiation
that might be a decent surrogate marker
for the soft plaque as well.
Yeah, so again you describe
that nice...
Well, the intima is just the lining
of the wall of the artery
and so I don't know
who created the technology,
but what he tried to do
was to age the blood vessel
based on the thickness of the intima.
And on literature review it really does not
correlate with events and mortality.
So it's interesting, in our office
we actually do the CIMT,
because it comes along
with a limited Doppler.
So the limited Doppler, we're actually
looking for plaque buildup
within the lumen itself.
And that perhaps is a surrogate test
for say a coronary calcium score.
It's not quantifiable
quite like a coronary calcium score.
The idea is if you could image
all the blood vessels in the body
and look at the plaque burden,
that would give you a great idea
about overall risk.
But we do like the calcium score,
because it's looking
at those tiny little coronary arteries
that, you know, you are at risk
for heart attack and stroke.
So CIMT doesn't really correlate.
I'd like to see the rate of change study
sort of like with the coronary calcium score
that has a fast change or slow change,
same for CIMT, and correlate that.
I don't know if the rate of change studies
have been done quite as well.
No not really.
In fact there's not much really linking CIMT
impressively to future risk prediction.
I mean it's a useful tool
to quantify and track,
but it's just very weak
compared to calcium.
Because as you say it's surrogate
in different vessel,
there is operator variation, quite large,
they have to pick the region, you know,
with to mouse clicks.
And you can't have people who have
quite a large intimal thickening,
but really have very stable arteries
with no real vulnerable plaque
and vice versa.
It's just the calcium is vastly better.
You did mention an interesting point,
the radiation,
and I researched that myself
out of interest because I often hear this,
but machines nowadays are around 1 mSv,
which is around the same
as a bilateral mammogram.
And if you look back at research
in the past decades,
Chernobyl and even Hiroshima
and the nuclear accident in Brazil,
the biggest civilian nuclear accident,
they tracked the people who had
much, much higher exposures than this.
I mean much higher.
And generally over decades
no signal between them and controls.
So I think the expert Douglas Boyd
who invented the calcium scanner,
I interviewed him the other day,
he said that that risk is maybe one in 10,000
of some possibility,
it's theoretical for 41 mSv, it's tiny
and it really is a distraction
from the topic of how powerful the scan is.
Yeah, that's a great point about
how we interpret the risk of radiation,
because in medicine there's this concept
of ALARA, as low as reasonably acceptable,
and it almost teaches us
to think of it as a way...
it doesn't matters
how high the radiation exposure is.
What matters is how much is the test
going to contribute to the care.
And is it worth it
for any amount of radiation exposure?
Certainly a one-time calcium score
or following every five years or so.
Where I get a little concerned is if someone
wants to follow a calcium score
every six months or everyone year,
because we don't have data to say that
short-term of a progression on happens
or what it means,
but more of the longer term following.
Would you agree with that statement?
Yeah.
So interestingly I've been working
with my hospital next-door,
that they've had a 64 slice GE machine
for quite some time, GE Optima,
and last year they purchased
the cardiac package.
And I've been bugging them right next door,
I said, "Hey, we got to get this thing set up
for calcium scans."
And I've learned a lot because I've sat
in there with their radiologist,
the radiology technician over lunch,
we just sit down and just...
fascinating stuff.
And first of all there's much less
user input error
when you do this calcium score.
You know, they calibrate the machine
and the machine does the calculation
to measure the calcium.
And I actually have been looking
at the studies.
So the radiating dosage,
so the effective radiation dosage...
So the device puts out a certain amount
of radiation, so it'll measure in DLP units,
and I think our machine is about 165 DLP.
So that is what the machine puts out
and then you have to do a fudge factor
calculation for the effective dosage.
So there's a chest factor.
And when we do the calculation,
our calcium score is...
the millisieverts is about 1.2.
And so you know I'm watching that
really carefully
and there's things that the technicians
can do so they can make a smaller window
and the idea
is that really is a small dosage.
And if you have a zero score you could
probably say that you don't need any more,
but it is okay to track...
you can track every 3 to 5 years,
maybe sooner if people are concerned.
Yeah, especially if someone's changed
their lifestyle significantly
and you want to see what impact that has.
So yeah, I think that's a pretty good
summary of calcium score.
Let's transition to a second about...
transition to weight loss.
Jeff, you talked about weight loss
in your talk today
and what is so interesting
is a lot of people come to a low-carb diet
for the purpose of weight loss.
But would you say weight loss
is the most important metric to follow?
No, not at all.
So again as I mentioned earlier,
my understanding of cardiovascular disease
led me to the metabolic syndrome.
And so I think why we're here
as engineers and doctors
is we're trying to understand how do treat
and prevent chronic disease.
And weight loss is just kind
of a consequence of doing all this.
And so, Ivor, when we talk about
the mechanisms of weight loss
or the mechanisms
of improving metabolic health,
there's the debate
of the calories in calories out
versus the carbohydrate insulin model
or some combination thereof
when you factor in psychological factors...
How do you break down and say what is
the reason why a low-carb diet works?
Yeah, that's
the million-dollar question.
So I will take a shot at it.
I think that calories... there is a place
for calories, there's no question.
It's not like the CI-CO,
that is simply eat less, move more,
because the body is
far more complex than that,
with myriad hormonal control
feedback loops.
So I think the primary benefit
of a low-carb diet
actually is appetite control
and management.
It's a really big factor.
So when I went on a low-carb diet,
and I'm not speaking N=1,
but it's seen in studies
and all over the place,
ad lib. low-carb diets have beaten
calorie controlled low-fat diets.
And we see again and again that when you
switch over from a glucose based metabolism
to a more fat burning metabolism,
appetite comes under your control.
In my case it was striking.
I was actually shocked within weeks
of how I could blithely not have to eat
when I didn't want to.
So I think that's one of the big factors.
Now when your insulin is high
and you are hyperinsulinemic,
like probably the majority
of American adults today,
that will tend towards trapping fat
and tend against the burning
of your body fat, so that is another factor.
But I would say appetite control
is the central linchpin
with the metabolic advantage
that's being discussed
and the lowering of insulin
being another strong element,
but it's not fully quantified,
I think that's fair to say.
What would you say, Jeff?
Yes, so there's a lot of factor to consider
that it's not necessarily all insulin.
There's many hormones and signals
such as leptin, the gut incretins,
we have to all consider that when
we are thinking about regulating appetite,
but of course insulin is probably
the master hormone involved.
And when you consider that perhaps
two thirds of the US population adults
over age 45 are currently diabetic
and prediabetic
that when you treat them
with carbohydrate restriction,
you're going to have most success.
And I think that's a very good answer
because we like to simplify things
and almost to a fault,
because we want to know,
"Is it the calories in, calories out?
Is it the carbohydrate insulin?"
And the truth is
it's far more complex than that.
That's basically how I would summarize
your answer, so I thank you for that.
The next question though Jeff is
I'm sure you see these patients
all the time in your office
that they come in with a stall.
And you can define the stall
on different ways,
but basically whatever metric
they are following,
whether it's their weight loss,
whether it's their insulin sensitivity,
it just plateaus and they get frustrated.
What kind of advice can you give to people
about your general approach?
When you see a stall
what do you think about...
what are your sort of go to top two
or three things to ask them to do?
Right, so if you're insulin resistant
you just respond rapidly,
your appetite is controlled,
you correct insulin resistance
and the fat that is trapped in a damper
behind insulin...
it opens these insulin floodgates
and energy just pours out from fat tissue.
But what often happens
and I mean I'm just thinking
of a patient I saw last week...
they never lost weight
from the beginning
even though they were
markedly insulin resistant
when we measured all the parameters.
This particular person was told by a trainer,
"You have to eat 180 g of fat a day.
No matter if you're hungry or not hungry."
And she was heeding the advice
and pumping in the fat.
And nothing happened.
I mean that's just an extreme example,
but the point is that what you are eating
at the beginning
is not going to be the same
when you hit this plateau.
And so guess what?
Controlling appetite
becomes most important.
This is what I think about, the quantity
of food that you consume,
the calories the activity
and then it trickles downhill.
But we have to make people understand
that the quantity of food is really important
once you become more insulin sensitive.
Yeah, very good point.
And now to tag onto that a little bit more,
to go a little bit deeper
into the specifics of the diet...
Ivor, this one's for you
as a good Irishman...
How does alcohol fit into the low-carb diet
and the low-carb lifestyle?
Rather well.
No, actually alcohol, I think a glass or two
of red wine a day is fine.
You know, the beers are generally carby.
I've heard beer described as liquid bread,
which is a pretty good.
A good description.
Yeah so I think generally alcohol...
interestingly there are studies done
in the 60s on humans
and calorie controlled, calorie for calorie
alcohol replacing carbohydrate
led to a slight drop in weight.
And then replacing carbohydrate back in
instead of alcohol iso-calorific
increased the weight again.
So well alcohol is the fourth food group.
So we know the protein
has the thermogenesis effect,
so over 100 calories of protein you eat
maybe 75 will fully get into your system
and there'll be losses for heat and fat and
carbohydrate around 10% or 15% of losses.
It appears alcohol as the fourth food group
has losses also because of its metabolism.
But that's just an amusing aside.
I think the advice is, you know,
moderate alcohol,
particularly something like dry red wine
is low in carbs, low in sugar
and it's a pleasurable social thing.
But anyone who has any hint
of an overindulgence nature,
you know, maybe it's best
to avoid alcohol altogether.
And drinking excessively
will knock people out of ketosis
and will lead to many other issues
including their work performance
and other things also.
I see it sort of the same way
as trying to decide
what's the mechanism of weight loss.
Well, you also have to factor in
the psychological components
of what you eat.
So with alcohol how it affects your liver,
how it affects your ketone production,
but also the psychological aspects
of alcohol.
Because let's be honest,
we don't make the best decisions
once we've had a couple of drinks
so we have to factor that in as well,
beyond the physiological effects.
That's a really, really important point...
I wish I'd remembered to mention.
Absolutely, when under the effects
of alcohol
that's often where you will do your cheats.
You will recharge your hands,
you will eat things you would never eat
without being slightly affected by alcohol.
So that indirect way
can certainly lead to failures.
Let's talk about your book for a second.
It's a fantastic book, very detailed
with great recipes,
great scientific descriptions
of why this works and how this works
and some very practical tips.
Can you share with us
maybe one of the stories in this book
that really jumped out at you,
that's a motivating story for you
and your patients?
One particular female who was here
last year at the conference
had come in to see us...
It's actually a typical story.
She was... Actually I'd say it's not
a typical story, it's an atypical story...
So this patient had been going
to the diabetes Center in Denver
for many, many years
and her weight kept going up and up,
diabetes was out-of-control,
taking more and more insulin.
And it was her partner that had brought
to her attention the low-carb diet.
So she was very frustrated at this point.
And so on their own as a couple
they pursued low-carb diet.
On their own, not recommended
by the Diabetes Center,
not recommended by any physician.
Absolutely on their own.
And by the time they had come to see me
she was already losing some weight.
And to make the long story short,
her A1c was in the range of 12 to 13.
Wow, that's high!
She got off insulin,
she got off all medication and presently...
And it was funny because
as we were writing the book,
she kept losing more and more weight
so we had to update...
We had to keep updating the book.
-What a great story!
-Yeah.
So as of today, and this is probably
maybe two years now,
she lost over 100 pounds,
I believe it's almost half her body weight.
And her A1c is 5 or 5.2.
From 12 to 5.2
getting off her medications.
Yes.
That's a great story.
And you know she went
to the elite diabetes center in town
and they couldn't help her.
Wow!
So not your average case,
not your standard case,
but certainly shows the power
that this can manifest in the frustration,
that it wouldn't be discussed
in an elite diabetes center.
Now do you see that trend changing
with the evidence from Virta health
in a peer-reviewed journal that we can get
people off their medications?
You know, it's not doctors around town
or N=1 stories telling their experience.
Now it's a published article.
So do you see the tide changing for that?
Again I've been at it for almost 20 years
and it's much slower than I would like,
but again we can do it one-on-one,
but that's not going to give us
that global message that we're looking for.
So you know hopefully we can infiltrate
the ADA meetings,
the American Heart Association meetings
and bring the evidence to the table
in that way and change the tide.
So what's next for you guys?
Ivor, what's next on your plate?
Well for me it's mostly conferences
in the next few months
where we'll be obviously sharing the book
and circulating that.
I'm in Glasgow
for a British cardiovascular society,
I'm in Majorca for Low-Carb Majorca,
Low-Carb Houston is on,
Estonia has popped up for September,
just a kind of health conference there
and possibly Cuba in December,
a diabetes conference,
not low-carb but diabetes and health.
And actually quite a few more
heading into next year.
That's great to hear that
it's a diabetes conference in there,
cardiovascular conference in there,
so not just low-carb conferences.
Well, actually my supporter,
and I kind of report to David Bobbitt now
of Irish Heart Disease Awareness
and we certainly share the focus on getting
the message out to wider communities
because I think
within the low-carb community
our obsession is giving people the chance
to discover their heart disease
with the calcium scan
and giving them the solutions
which include low-carb,
but obviously low-carb is only one part
of the multifactor solution.
But the challenges that people
within the low-carb community
have a good idea for a lot of the science
and they are quite ahead of the game
and they are even now learning a lot
about the calcification scan
through our efforts and others.
But the huge majority of people
are outside the low-carb community.
So it's really vital for us
to get to ordinary people,
I mean those people at 52 or 53 of age
that are going to drop dead
of a heart attack and leave children behind
and they are not obese
and they don't smoke,
but they have hyperinsulinemia
unknown, undiagnosed,
they have huge vascular disease
that's going to kill them,
but no one gave them a scan
to wake them up.
So our fixation is to get to those people.
So I agree any conferences that are not
just low-carb are our primary target.
That's a very good point.
I love how you brought up that the low-carb
is one part of the solution
and is so important to emphasize.
And in your book you do put
a strong emphasis
on sun exposure and sleep
and stress and physical activities
and you have your list of 10 factors
and I think that's really important
to fall back on,
that we focus so much on diet because
it's something we're involved in every day
and we have such an intimate relationship
with food and it's so complex.
But it's one piece of the puzzle
so I'm glad you brought that up.
Yeah absolutely, Bret, and again
just thinking back to the Pareto principle,
people say that heart disease
has 300 factors now.
It's apparently 300 that are listed.
But obviously by the Pareto principle
the top 5 or 10 will account for a huge amount
of the disease on mortality
and people can't focus on everything.
So it's very confusing to tell people
too many factors including many lesser ones.
And cholesterol can suffer
from this problem as well,
that is not a primary central factor,
it's an interacting factor.
But we like to focus on the top ones,
the Big Bang for the book
that will save most people.
Good point.
And Dr. Gerber, what's next for you?
Yes, so I don't go
to as many conferences as Ivor,
because I still have my day job
as a family doctor
and that takes up most of my time.
And I have to say, you know,
almost 30 years doing it I still enjoy it.
There's passion and helping
to take people off medication
and giving them tools where they can really
make changes is really helpful.
But just a backup in terms of conferences,
Ivor and I did attend a really important
and interesting conference in Zrich.
It was put on by the BMJ and Swiss RE.
And the purpose of that conference
was consensus.
So we actually had
the two sides come together
and I'm a person of moderation
and so trying to find consensus
and this was just wonderful.
And we hope that we could see
more conferences like that into the future.
So I pick and choose the conferences
that I attend,
I'm busy with our Denver conference
that is coming up in March 2019
and we're always looking
for interesting topics, keeping it fresh.
We have some of the returned
regular speakers
and then to find new speakers.
And so our mantra for our conferences
is that these are for doctors
put on by doctors,
so we offer educational credit
and everyone else is invited.
That's great, very good.
Dr. Jeffry Gerber, Denver's Diet Doctor,
thank you so much for joining me.
Ivor Cummins, fatemperor.com,
-Thanks a lot, Bret.
-Thanks.